RFC023: X509Credential (#283)
nuts-foundation/nuts-specification: rfc/rfc023-x509credential.md

# RFC023: X509Credential

|                           |               |
|:--------------------------|:--------------|
| Nuts foundation           | R.G. Krul     |
| Request for Comments: 023 | Zorg bij jou  |
|                           | R. Groen      |
|                           | Zorg bij jou  |
|                           | December 2024 |

## Abstract

> Trust is a key element in the Nuts network. This RFC describes how X.509 certificates can be used to make use of X.509 sourced trust in the NUTS framework. The  X.509 certification process has been around for a long time and is widely used in the internet. This RFC describes how  x.509 certificates can be used in the Nuts network to establish trust between parties by being able to link the  x.509 certificate to a Nuts identity by as a Verifiable Credential that is issued by the holder of the x509 identity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Trust is a key element in the Nuts network. This RFC describes how X.509 certificates can be used to make use of X.509 sourced trust in the NUTS framework. The X.509 certification process has been around for a long time and is widely used in the internet. This RFC describes how x.509 certificates can be used in the Nuts network to establish trust between parties by being able to link the x.509 certificate to a Nuts identity by as a Verifiable Credential that is issued by the holder of the x509 identity.
```

> This RFC specifies the requirements and validation process for the `X509Credential`, a W3C Verifiable Credential ( VC) type issued by the subject of a X.509 certificate, represented by a `did:x509` DID. The `X509Credential` ensures strong alignment with the properties of the associated  X.509 certificate and defines mechanisms to validate the credential and verify its association with a `did:x509` DID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This RFC specifies the requirements and validation process for the `X509Credential`, a W3C Verifiable Credential ( VC) type issued by the subject of a X.509 certificate, represented by a `did:x509` DID. The `X509Credential` ensures strong alignment with the properties of the associated X.509 certificate and defines mechanisms to validate the credential and verify its association with a `did:x509` DID.
```

## Status of this document

This document is currently in draft status. Feedback is welcome to improve the interoperability and robustness of the specification.

### Copyright Notice

![](../.gitbook/assets/license.png)

## 1. Introduction

> The [did:x509](https://trustoverip.github.io/tswg-did-x509-method-specification/) method aims to achieve interoperability between existing  X.509 solutions and Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs). This to to support operational models in which a full transition to DIDs is not achievable or desired yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [did:x509](https://trustoverip.github.io/tswg-did-x509-method-specification/) method aims to achieve interoperability between existing X.509 solutions and Decentralized Identifiers (DIDs). This to to support operational models in which a full transition to DIDs is not achievable or desired yet.
```

> The `X509Credential` is a W3C Verifiable Credential type designed for use cases where trust anchors are based on  X.509 certificates. It leverages the `did:x509` method, as specified in the [Trust Over IP DID:X509 Method Specification](https://trustoverip.github.io/tswg-did-x509-method-specification/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `X509Credential` is a W3C Verifiable Credential type designed for use cases where trust anchors are based on X.509 certificates. It leverages the `did:x509` method, as specified in the [Trust Over IP DID:X509 Method Specification](https://trustoverip.github.io/tswg-did-x509-method-specification/).
```

By aligning credential subject validation with the fields of the associated `did:x509` DID and enforcing certificate revocation checks, the `X509Credential` ensures integrity and adherence to the PKI trust model.

## 2. Definitions

- **X509Credential**: A Verifiable Credential whose issuer is a `did:x509` DID and whose structure adheres to the
 requirements in this document.
- **did:x509**: A Decentralized Identifier (DID) method specified by the Trust Over IP Foundation, where the DID is

>  derived from an  X.509 certificate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 derived from an X.509 certificate.
```

> - **Issuer Certificate**: The  X.509 certificate associated with the `did:x509` DID that issued the credential.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Issuer Certificate**: The X.509 certificate associated with the `did:x509` DID that issued the credential.
```

- **Credential Subject**: The entity described by the credential as the subject of the credential.
- **Revocation Check**: The process of verifying the revocation status of the issuer certificate using mechanisms like CRL.

## 3. Used standards and technologies

This RFC builds on the following standards and technologies:

* [X.509 Certificate Standard](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5280)
* [JSON Web Signature (JWS)](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7515#section-4.1.6)

> * [did:x509 method specification](https://trustoverip.github.io/tswg-did-x509-method-specification/), with modifications

Author: ```suggestion
* [did:x509 method](https://trustoverip.github.io/tswg-did-x509-method-specification/), with modifications
```

* [Verifiable Credentials Data Model v1.1](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/)

### 3.1 X.509 certificates, a brief introduction

An **X.509 certificate** is a digital certificate that follows the X.509 Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) standard. It is widely used for secure communication over the internet, such as HTTPS, email encryption, and digital signatures.

> #### Key Features of X.509 Certificates:

Author: ```suggestion

#### Key Features of X.509 Certificates:
```

- **Structure**: It contains information about the certificate owner (e.g., organization, common name, public key) and the issuing Certificate Authority (CA). The certificate is signed by the CA's private key to ensure authenticity.
- **Trust Hierarchy**:
    - Trust is anchored in a **Certificate Authority (CA)**, which is a trusted third party.

>     - Certificates can form a chain of trust, starting from a **root certificate** (trusted CA) to **intermediate certificates**, down to the **end-user/client certificates** (specific use-case certificates).

Author: ```suggestion
    - Certificates can form a chain of trust, starting from a **root certificate** (trusted CA) to **intermediate certificates**, down to the **end-user/client certificates**.
```

An example of the trust chain hierarchy:

```asciidoc
┌────────────────────┐
│      Root CA       │
└─────────┬──────────┘
          │           
┌─────────▼──────────┐
│  Intermediate CA   │
└─────────┬──────────┘
          │           
┌─────────▼──────────┐
│  Intermediate CA   │
└─────────┬──────────┘
          │           
┌─────────▼──────────┐
│Signing Certificate │
└────────────────────┘
```

> ### 3.2 Nuts and X.509:

Author: ```suggestion

### 3.2 Nuts and X.509:
```

The Nuts framework extends X.509 certificates into its decentralized identity (DID) ecosystem using the `did:x509` DID method. This method facilitates linking an X.509 certificate to a verifiable credential (`X509Credential`), providing trust while bridging traditional PKI with decentralized trust models. This is especially relevant in systems reliant on existing X.509 implementations, such as healthcare or government frameworks.

> ### 3.4 Using X.509 Certificates for signing JWTs

Reviewer: There's no `3.3`

> The JWT is a standard that is used to sign and encrypt JSON objects. Thus, standard allows for the signing and encryption
> of JSON objects with certificates part of a certificate chain. This allows for the signing of JSON objects with the
> private key of the certificate and the verification of the signature with the public key of the certificate, and the
> verification of the certificate chain with the public key of the CA. This is done by using the following headers fields:

Author: ```suggestion
JWT is a standard that is used to sign JSON objects. By signing JSON objects with the
private key of the certificate, authenticity of the JWT signer can be established. The signature of the JWT can be verified using the public key of the certificate. This is done by using the following headers fields:
```

* `x5c`, the ordered certificate chain as a list of base64 encoded certificates in the DER format, with the signing certificate first and the root certificate last.
* `x5t#S256`, the thumbprint of the signing certificate as a SHA256 hash.

### 3.5 The `did:x509` DID Method

> The `did:x509` DID method is a method that can be used to create a Decentralized Identifier (DID) based on an X.509 certificate chain. Trust in the DID is anchored by specifying the (hash of) one of the chain's intermediate, or the root CA's certificate. The did:x509 method is used to bind attributes of the signing certificate the holder of the signing certificate in a did:x509 string. By doing this, a did:x509 DID can be used to identify the holder of the signing certificate by specifying attributes that are assigned by the signing certificate. The DID method defines different types of attributes by `DID policies`, with their specific validation logic. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `did:x509` DID method is a method that can be used to create a Decentralized Identifier (DID) based on an X.509 certificate chain. Trust in the DID is anchored by specifying the (hash of) one of the chain's intermediate, or the root CA's certificate. The did:x509 method is used to bind attributes of the signing certificate in the did:x509 string. The DID method defines different types of attributes via `DID policies`. 
```

For example following did:x509:

```
did:x509:0:sha256:WE4P5dd8DnLHSkyHaIjhp4udlkF9LqoKwCvu9gl38jk::subject:C:US:ST:California:O:My%20Organisation
```

> ties down the holder of the signing certificate by, first having a digitally signed certificate by the CA with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ties down the holder of the signing certificate by, first having a digitally signed certificate from the CA with the
```

> thumbprint `WE4P5dd8DnLHSkyHaIjhp4udlkF9LqoKwCvu9gl38jk` and then having the following attributes in the certificate of the `subject` DID policy:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
thumbprint `WE4P5dd8DnLHSkyHaIjhp4udlkF9LqoKwCvu9gl38jk` and then having the following attributes from the certificate match the `subject` DID policy:
```

* Subject:
  * C: US
  * ST: California
  * O: My Organisation

> The did:x509 specifies the following set of DID policies (between parenthesis) and their attributes:

Author: ```suggestion
`did:x509` specifies the following set of DID policies (between parenthesis) and their attributes:
```

```json
{
  "sub" :  "did:x509:subject:O:Amsterdam",
  ...
  "credentialSubject" : {
    "id" : "did:x509:subject:O:Amsterdam",
    "subject": {
      "O" : "Amsterdam"
    }
  }
}
```
- Fields not present in the `did:x509` DID Document invalidate the credential.
- For JWT based credentials, the `sub` value(s) must match the `credentialSubject.id` field.

### 5.4 Verify the Proof and signing algorithm

The cryptographic proof of the credential MUST be verified using the public key associated with the `did:x509` DID.
This involves:

- Resolving the public key from the DID Document.
- Verify that the header value of `alg` is set to be `PS256`.
- Verifying the signature on the credential with `PS256` signing algorithm.

### 5.5 Check Credential Expiry

If the `issuanceDate` or any other relevant date constraints (e.g., `expirationDate`) are present, they MUST be
validated to ensure the credential is within its valid timeframe.

## 6. Security Considerations

The following security considerations need to be addressed:

> ### 6.1 **Broken Trust Chain**

Reviewer 2: capitalization of all 6.x headers doesn't match the rest of the document

  - Attackers could inject unauthorized or false data (e.g., incorrect organization name or purpose), tricking verifiers
    by impersonating trusted entities.
  - Loss of trust in the system due to inconsistencies between certificates and credentials.

### 6.6 **Forged Proofs or Tampered Credentials**

- Failure to verify cryptographic proofs tied to certificates could allow credentials or data to be tampered with.
- **Consequences**:
  - Credentials could be modified to grant unauthorized access.
  - The integrity of systems relying on these credentials could be compromised.

### 6.7 **Missing Root CA Verification**

- If the source of trust (Root CA) is not explicitly verified and trusted, attackers could use certificates issued by
  unapproved CAs.For instance, in case of UZI certificates the `ca-fingerprint` must match the hash of either the Root
  CA or one of the Intermediate CAs as published by the [UZI register](https://www.zorgcsp.nl/ca-certificaten).
- **Consequences**:
  - Fake certificates signed by rogue or unvalidated CAs could be accepted as valid.
  - Attackers gain the ability to impersonate legitimate entities in scenarios such as encrypted communication or

>     identity verification.

Reviewer 2: I think this is a bad example. UZI server certificates must be signed by the intermediate issuing the leaf or you would pin the entire PKIo chain and not just the UZI server certs.

It is also not clear to me what this point is about. It starts on root CA ( which suggests chain) validation, but it the example is on certificate pinning

### 4.1 Example `X509Credential`

Below is an example of an `X509Credential` issued by a `did:x509` DID. The credential subject is identified by a `did:web`.  The first snippet is the JWT header, and the second snippet is the credential payload.

```json
{
  "alg": "PS256",
  "typ": "JWT",
  "x5c": [
    "<base64 encoded leaf-certificate in the DER format>",
    "<base64 encoded issuer-intermediate-certificate in the DER format>",
    "<base64 encoded issuer-certificate in the DER format>"
  ],
  "x5t#S256": "<sha256 thumbprint>",
  "kid": "did:x509:0:sha256:WE4P5dd8DnLHSkyHaIjhp4udlkF9LqoKwCvu9gl38jk::subject:O:OLVG%20Oost::subject:L:Amsterdam::san:otherName:23419943234#1"
}
```

Payload:
```json
{
  "vc": {
    "@context": [
      "https://www.w3.org/2018/credentials/v1",
      "https://nuts.nl/credentials/v1"
    ],
    "type": [
      "VerifiableCredential",
      "X509Credential"
    ],
    "issuer": "did:x509:0:sha256:WE4P5dd8DnLHSkyHaIjhp4udlkF9LqoKwCvu9gl38jk::subject:O:OLVG%20Oost::subject:L:Amsterdam::san:otherName:23419943234",
    "issuanceDate": "2024-12-01T00:00:00Z",
    "credentialSubject": {
      "id": "did:web:example.com",

>       "subject:O": "OLVG Oost",

Author: ```suggestion
      "subject:O": "Ziekenhuis Oost",
```

      "subject:L": "Amsterdam",
      "san:otherName": "23419943234"
    }
  }
}
```

## 5. Validation

### 5.1 Verify Credential Structure

To validate an `X509Credential`, the following steps MUST be performed:

> - Verify that the credential is in JWT format.

Author: ```suggestion
- Verify that the credential is in JWT format.
- Verify the validity of the credential (signature, revocation if applicable).
```

- Verify that the issuer's DID is a `did:x509` DID.
- Verify that the DID specifies an accepted trust anchor (CA certificate) for `ca-fingerprint`.
- Resolve the `did:x509` DID document according to
  the [did:x509 specification](https://trustoverip.github.io/tswg-did-x509-method-specification/) and check the
  certificate chain for revocation.

> - Validate that the `credentialSubject` fields match the policies in the `did:x509` DID.

Author: ```suggestion
- Validate that the `credentialSubject` fields match the policies in the `did:x509` DID.
- Validate that the credential contains the attributes required by the use case.
```

> - Validate that the `credentialSubject` fields match the policies in the `did:x509` DID.

Author: ```suggestion
- Validate that the `credentialSubject` fields match the policies in the `did:x509` DID.
  - All `credentialSubject` fields MUST be present in the DID.
  - All `credentialSubject` fields MUST be prefixed with the DID policy (e.g. `subject` or `san`) they belong to.
```

### 5.2 Validate the Issuer Certificate

The certificate associated with the `did:x509` issuer MUST be validated as follows:

> - **Certificate Chain Validation**: The certificate must have a valid trust chain. The chain MUST be complete and all

Author: ```suggestion
- **Certificate Chain Validation**: The certificate must have a valid trust chain. The chain MUST be complete (from root to leaf) and all
```

  signatures need to be checked.
- **Revocation Check**: Verify the revocation status of the certificate using CRL.

> - The DID MUST specify an accepted trust anchor through its `ca-fingerprint` property and the trust anchor MUST be
>   present in the certificate chain as either the Root CA or on of the Intermediate CAs. What trust anchors are accepted
>   depends on the use case.

Author: ```suggestion
- The DID MUST specify an accepted trust anchor through its `ca-fingerprint` property and the trust anchor MUST be
  present in the certificate chain as either the Root CA or one of the Intermediate CAs. What trust anchors are accepted
  depends on the use case.
```

Failure to validate the issuer certificate invalidates the credential.

### 5.3 Validate the Credential Subject

The `credentialSubject` MUST be verified against the `did:x509` DID Document. Specifically:

- Every field in the `credentialSubject` MUST be present in the `did:x509` policies. The fields in the `credentialSubject` are nested with their DID policies as keys, so `subject:L:Amsterdam`, becomes: 
```json
{
  "sub" :  "did:x509:subject:O:Amsterdam",
  ...
  "credentialSubject" : {
    "id" : "did:x509:subject:O:Amsterdam",
    "subject": {
      "L" : "Amsterdam"
    }
  }
}
```
- Fields not present in the `did:x509` DID Document invalidate the credential.

> - For JWT based credentials, the `sub` value(s) must match the `credentialSubject.id` field.

Author: ```suggestion
- The JWT's `sub` claim MUST match the `credentialSubject.id` field.
```

### 5.4 Verify the Proof and signing algorithm

The cryptographic proof of the credential MUST be verified using the public key associated with the `did:x509` DID.
This involves:

- Resolving the public key from the DID Document.
- Verify that the header value of `alg` is set to be `PS256`.
- Verifying the signature on the credential with `PS256` signing algorithm.

### 5.5 Check Credential Expiry

If the `issuanceDate` or any other relevant date constraints (e.g., `expirationDate`) are present, they MUST be
validated to ensure the credential is within its valid timeframe.

## 6. Security Considerations

The following security considerations need to be addressed:

> ### 6.1 **Broken Trust Chain**

Author: ```suggestion
### 6.1 **Broken trust chain**
```

- If the certificate chain is not validated, attackers could present fake certificates signed by an untrusted or rogue
  Certificate Authority (CA).
- **Consequences**:
  - Users or systems may accept malicious certificates, allowing attackers to impersonate legitimate entities (e.g.,
    phishing attacks or man-in-the-middle (MitM) attacks).
  - Sensitive data (e.g., credentials, financial data) exchanged with fraudulent sites could be intercepted.

> ### 6.2 **Revocation Checks Not Performed**

Author: ```suggestion
### 6.2 **Revocation checks not performed**
```

- If you fail to check the status of certificates for revocation using CRL (Certificate Revocation List), certificates
  that have been compromised or expired could still be considered valid.
- **Consequences**:
  - Attackers could use stolen or revoked certificates to bypass authentication or encryption.
  - Systems may continue to trust certificates issued to malicious actors.

> ### 6.3 **Expired Certificates**

Author: ```suggestion
### 6.3 **Expired certificates**
```

- If credential expiry is ignored, certificates whose validity period has elapsed could still be used and trusted.
- **Consequences**:
  - Attackers may exploit outdated certificates to perform replay attacks where previously valid credentials are reused.
  - Trust in infrastructure degrades because expired certificates no longer reflect proper certificate holder
    responsibility/accountability.

> ### 6.4 **Weak Keys or Algorithms**

Author: ```suggestion
### 6.4 **Weak keys or algorithms**
```

- If weak cryptographic algorithms (e.g., MD5, SHA-1) or small key sizes (e.g., <2048-bit RSA) are used, the
  certificates or their signatures could be cracked by modern computational power.
- **Consequences**:
  - An attacker could forge or spoof certificates.
  - Sensitive data could be decrypted easily, exposing confidential information such as passwords, personal data, etc.

> ### 6.5 **Improper Credential Subject Validation**

Author: ```suggestion
### 6.5 Improper credential subject validation
```

- If the `credentialSubject` field in frameworks like `X509Credential` is not properly validated, it may allow
  fields not aligned with the X.509 certificate to be added or accepted.
- **Consequences**:
  - Attackers could inject unauthorized or false data (e.g., incorrect organization name or purpose), tricking verifiers
    by impersonating trusted entities.
  - Loss of trust in the system due to inconsistencies between certificates and credentials.

> ### 6.6 **Forged Proofs or Tampered Credentials**

Author: ```suggestion
### 6.6 Forged Proofs or Tampered Credentials
```

- Failure to verify cryptographic proofs tied to certificates could allow credentials or data to be tampered with.
- **Consequences**:
  - Credentials could be modified to grant unauthorized access.
  - The integrity of systems relying on these credentials could be compromised.

> ### 6.7 **Missing Root CA Verification**

Author: ```suggestion
### 6.7 Missing Root CA Verification
```

> - If the source of trust (Root CA) is not explicitly verified and trusted, attackers could use certificates issued by

Author: ```suggestion
- If the trust anchor (root or any intermediate CA) is not explicitly verified and trusted, attackers could use certificates issued by
```

  unapproved CAs.For instance, in case of UZI certificates the `ca-fingerprint` must match the hash of either the Root
  CA or one of the Intermediate CAs as published by the [UZI register](https://www.zorgcsp.nl/ca-certificaten).
- **Consequences**:
  - Fake certificates signed by rogue or unvalidated CAs could be accepted as valid.
  - Attackers gain the ability to impersonate legitimate entities in scenarios such as encrypted communication or
    identity verification.

> ### 6.8 **Certificate Misuse**

Author: ```suggestion
### 6.8 Certificate Misuse
```

- Without proper validation of certificate attributes (e.g., URA number in UZI certificates), certificates may be
  misused in unintended contexts.
- **Consequences**:
  - Fraud or impersonation using certificates outside their intended scope.
  - Misrepresentation of organizations or individuals.

> ### 6.9 **Lack of Reliable Revocation Handling**

Author: ```suggestion
### 6.9 Lack of Reliable Revocation Handling
```

* `x5c`, the ordered certificate chain as a list of base64 encoded certificates in the DER format, with the signing certificate first and the root certificate last.
* `x5t#S256`, the thumbprint of the signing certificate as a SHA256 hash.

### 3.4 The `did:x509` DID Method

The `did:x509` DID method is a method that can be used to create a Decentralized Identifier (DID) based on an X.509 certificate chain.

Trust in the DID is anchored by specifying the one of the chain's intermediate, or the root CA's certificate. This trust anchor is encoded in the `did:x509` as `ca-fingerprint` property, which is the hash of the certificate. Choosing the right trust anchors (or accepted `ca-fingerprint`s) is very important, since it limits which certificates give access, and which doesn't. E.g. PKI trees often have subtrees for different user groups.

The did:x509 method is used to bind attributes of the signing certificate in the did:x509 string. The DID method defines different types of attributes via `DID policies`. 

For example following did:x509:

```
did:x509:0:sha256:WE4P5dd8DnLHSkyHaIjhp4udlkF9LqoKwCvu9gl38jk::subject:C:US:ST:California:O:My%20Organisation
```

> ties down the holder of the signing certificate by, first having a digitally signed certificate from the CA with the
> thumbprint `WE4P5dd8DnLHSkyHaIjhp4udlkF9LqoKwCvu9gl38jk` and then having the following attributes in the certificate of the `subject` DID policy:

Author: ```suggestion
Specifies a certificate subject to an organization based in California, issued by a CA certified identified by thumbprint `WE4P5dd8DnLHSkyHaIjhp4udlkF9LqoKwCvu9gl38jk`. It expresses the following attributes from the certificate through the `subject` DID policy:
```

`did:x509` specifies the following set of DID policies (between parenthesis) and their attributes:

* Subject (subject)
  * C: Country
  * CN: Common Name
  * L: Locality
  * ST: State
  * O: Organisation
  * OU: Organisation Unit
  * STREET: Street Address
* Subject Other Name (san)
  * email
  * dns
  * uri
* Extended Key Usage (eku)
  * Any OID
* A Free-to-Use CA For Code Signing (fulcio-issuer)
  * Any issuer hostname

### 3.5 Extending the `did:x509` specification

This RFC extends the Subject Other Name (san) policy with the following attribute:

* Subject Other Name (san)
  * otherName: A free-form attribute that can be used to specify any attribute that is not covered by the other
    attributes.

The otherName attribute can be used to specify extra attributes in a X.509 certificate. This attribute is added to the specification of this RFC to cater for the use case where the san.otherName attribute is used in the X.509 certificate and plays a role in the identification of the holder of the certificate.

## 4. The X509Credential Structure

An `X509Credential` must conform to the general structure of a W3C Verifiable Credential and conform to the following rules:

> - The credential MUST be in JWT format.

Author: ```suggestion
- The credential MUST be in JWT proof format.
```

- `type`: MUST include `VerifiableCredential` and `X509Credential`.
- `issuer`: MUST be a valid `did:x509` identifier.
- `credentialSubject`: MUST only contain fields explicitly present in the `did:x509` DID policies with the fields mapped by each type as a separate map. An example: 
```
{
  "subject": {
    "O" : "My Organisation"
  },
  "san" : {
    "email" : "info@example.com"
  }
}
```

The credential subject can be identified by any DID method (e.g. `did:web`) accepted by the credential verifier.

> ### 4.1 Allowed signing algorithms:
> * The `alg` value of the JWT header MUST match the `PS256` value. 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> ### 4.2 Example `X509Credential`

Author: ```suggestion
### 4.1 Example `X509Credential`
```

      "X509Credential"
    ],
    "issuer": "did:x509:0:sha256:<hash>::subject:O:Library%20The%20Bookworm::subject:L:Bookland::san:otherName:123",
    "issuanceDate": "2024-12-01T00:00:00Z",
    "credentialSubject": {
      "id": "did:web:example.com",
      "subject:O": "Library The Bookworm",
      "subject:L": "Bookland",
      "san:otherName": "123"
    }
  }
}
```

## Validation

To validate an `X509Credential`, the following steps MUST be performed:

- Verify that the credential is in JWT format.
- Verify that the issuer's DID is a `did:x509` DID.
- Resolve the `did:x509` DID document according to
  the [did:x509 specification](https://trustoverip.github.io/tswg-did-x509-method-specification/) and check the
  certificate chain for
  revocation.
- Validate that the `credentialSubject` fields match the policies in the `did:x509` DID.

### 1. Verify Credential Structure

Ensure that the credential:

- Includes the `X509Credential` type.
- Contains a valid `did:x509` issuer.
- Includes a `credentialSubject` whose fields match the `did:x509` DID Document.

### 2. Validate the Issuer Certificate

The certificate associated with the `did:x509` issuer MUST be validated as follows:

> - **Certificate Chain Validation**: The certificate must have a valid trust chain to a known root CA.

Reviewer 3: Not to a known root CA, but to the CA pinpointed in the did:x509

The verifier of a x509 certificate can then trust the information in the certificate by verifying the signature of the
certificate chain of the certificate. The verifier can then trust the information in the certificate by trusting the CA
that signed the certificate.

The chain of certificates can be viewed as a hierarchy, where the root certificate is the certificate is trusted, and
signing is delegated to intermediate certificates. The root certificate is the certificate that is trusted by the
holder. The holder maintains a list of trusted CAs that the holder trusts. The holder can then
verify the signature of the certificate chain by verifying the signature of the CA that signed the intermediate
certificate and the intermediate certificates that lead to the signing certificate.

```asciidoc
┌────────────────────┐
│        CA          │
└─────────┬──────────┘
          │           
┌─────────▼──────────┐
│    Intermediate    │
└─────────┬──────────┘
          │           
┌─────────▼──────────┐
│    Intermediate    │
└─────────┬──────────┘
          │           
┌─────────▼──────────┐
│Signing Certificate │
└────────────────────┘
```

### Using x509 for signing JWEs

> The JWE is a standard that is used to sign and encrypt JSON objects. Thus standard allows for the signing and encryption

Author: JWE is only for encryption (which is not applicable here), JWS is for signing. JWTs are a form of JWS', and since we only use JWTs, I think you can just call them JWTs in this section?

of JSON objects with certificates part of the a certificate chain. This allows for the signing of JSON objects with the
private key of the certificate and the verification of the signature with the public key of the certificate, and the
verification of the certificate chain with the public key of the CA. This is done by using the following headers fields:

> * x5c, the certificate chain as a list of base64 encoded certificates in the DER format, with the signing certificate

Author: ```suggestion
* x5c, the ordered certificate chain as a list of base64 encoded certificates in the DER format, with the signing certificate
```

  first and the root certificate last.
* x5t, the thumbprint of the signing certificate.

> * x5t#S256, the thumbprint of the signing certificate as a SHA256 hash.

Author: I think at least one is required, right?

Reviewer 2: probably don't accept `sha-1` -> must use `x5t#S256`? 
linked to nuts-foundation/go-didx509-toolkit/issues/53

### The `did:x509` DID Method

> The `did:x509` DID method is a method that can be used to create a Decentralized Identifier (DID) based on an x509
> certificate chain. This is done by creating a DID that is based on the root CA of the certificate chain. The did:x509
> method is used to specify specific attributes of the signing certificate to specify the holder of the signing
> certificate. By doing this, a did:x509 DID can be used to identify the holder of the signing certificate by specifica
> attributes that are assigned to the signing certificate. So, for example following did:x509:

Author: ```suggestion
The `did:x509` DID method is a method that can be used to create a Decentralized Identifier (DID) based on an x509
certificate chain. Trust in the DID is anchored by specifying the (hash of) one of the chain's intermediate, or the root CA's certificate. The did:x509 method
is used to specify specific attributes of the signing certificate to specify the holder of the signing
certificate. By doing this, a did:x509 DID can be used to identify the holder of the signing certificate by specificying
attributes that are assigned to the signing certificate. So, for example following did:x509:
```

```
did:x509:0:sha256:WE4P5dd8DnLHSkyHaIjhp4udlkF9LqoKwCvu9gl38jk::subject:C:US:ST:California:O:My%20Organisation
```

> ties down the holder of the signing certificate by, first having a digitally signed certificate by the root CA with the

Author: ```suggestion
ties down the holder of the signing certificate by, first having a digitally signed certificate by the CA with the
```

thumbprint `WE4P5dd8DnLHSkyHaIjhp4udlkF9LqoKwCvu9gl38jk` and then having the following attributes in the certificate:

* Subjects:
  * C: US
  * ST: California
  * O: My Organisation

> The did:x509 defines various attribute types that can be used as attributes, such as:

Author: if this is the complete list, no need to specify "such as", since this is all there is

* Subject
  * C: Country
  * CN: Common Name
  * L: Locality
  * ST: State
  * O: Organisation
  * OU: Organisation Unit
  * STREET: Street Address
* Subject Other Name (san)
  * email
  * dns
  * uri
* Extended Key Usage (eku)
  * Any OID
* A Free-to-Use CA For Code Signing (fulcio-issuer)
  * Any issuer hostname

> ### Extending the x509 specification

Author: ```suggestion
### Extending the`did:x509` specification
```

> This RFC extends the Subject Other Name (san) attribute with the following attribute:

Author: ```suggestion
This RFC extends the Subject Other Name (san) policy with the following attribute:
```

* Subject Other Name (san)
  * otherName: A free-form attribute that can be used to specify any attribute that is not covered by the other
    attributes.

The otherName attribute can be used to specify extra attributes in a x509 certificate. This attribute is added to the specification of this RFC to cater for the use case where the san.otherName attribute is used in the x509 certificate and plays a role in the identification of the holder of the certificate.

## The X509Credential Structure

An `X509Credential` must conform to the general structure of a W3C Verifiable Credential and conform to the following
rules:

- The credential MUST be in JWT format.

> - `type`: MUST include `VerifiableCredential` and `X509Credential`.

Author: Is this a JSON-LD, or playground limitation? If it's the latter, the playground should be fixed.

### Example `X509Credential`

Below is an example of an `X509Credential` issued by a `did:x509` DID. The credential subject is identified by a
`did:web`.
The first snippet is the JWT header, and the second snippet is the credential payload.

(TODO: check this example)

```json
{
  "alg": "PS256",
  "typ": "JWT",
  "x5c": [
    "<base64 encoded leaf-certificate in the DER format>",
    "<base64 encoded issuer-intermediate-certificate in the DER format>",
    "<base64 encoded issuer-certificate in the DER format>"
  ],
  "x5t": "<thumbprint>",
  "kid": "did:x509:0:sha256:<hash>::subject:O:Library%20The%20Bookworm::subject:L:Bookland::san:otherName:123#1"
}
```

(TODO: Add right JSON-LD context)
Payload:

```json
{
  "vc": {
    "@context": [
      "https://www.w3.org/2018/credentials/v1"
    ],
    "type": [
      "VerifiableCredential",
      "X509Credential"
    ],
    "issuer": "did:x509:0:sha256:<hash>::subject:O:Library%20The%20Bookworm::subject:L:Bookland::san:otherName:123",
    "issuanceDate": "2024-12-01T00:00:00Z",
    "credentialSubject": {
      "id": "did:web:example.com",
      "subject:O": "Library The Bookworm",
      "subject:L": "Bookland",

>       "san:otherName": "123"

Author: out of date example

    }
  }
}
```

## Validation

> To validate an `X509Credential`, the following steps MUST be performed:

Author: We should add a step that the DID specifies an accepted trust anchor (CA certificate) for `ca-fingerprint`, referring to the Security Consideration

- Verify that the credential is in JWT format.
- Verify that the issuer's DID is a `did:x509` DID.
- Resolve the `did:x509` DID document according to
  the [did:x509 specification](https://trustoverip.github.io/tswg-did-x509-method-specification/) and check the
  certificate chain for revocation.
- Validate that the `credentialSubject` fields match the policies in the `did:x509` DID.

### 1. Verify Credential Structure

Ensure that the credential:

- Includes the `X509Credential` type.
- Contains a valid `did:x509` issuer.
- Includes a `credentialSubject` whose fields match the `did:x509` DID Document.

> ### 2. Validate the Issuer Certificate

Author: these steps don't match the list above

The certificate associated with the `did:x509` issuer MUST be validated as follows:

- **Certificate Chain Validation**: The certificate must have a valid trust chain. The use case determines if the CA is
  trusted.

> - **Revocation Check**: Verify the revocation status of the certificate using OCSP or CRL.

Author: Nuts node doesn't support OCSP

Failure to validate the issuer certificate invalidates the credential.

### 3. Validate the Credential Subject

> The `credentialSubject` MUST be verified against the `did:x509` DID Document. Specifically:

Reviewer: ps: current nuts-node validation requires a 1-on-1 mapping and credentialSubject assertions not present in a policy results in an error.

- Every field in the `credentialSubject` MUST be present in the `did:x509` DID Document.
- Fields not present in the `did:x509` DID Document invalidate the credential.

### 4. Verify the Proof

The cryptographic proof of the credential MUST be verified using the public key associated with the `did:x509` DID.
This involves:

- Resolving the public key from the DID Document.
- Verifying the signature on the credential's `proof`.

### 5. Check Credential Expiry

If the `issuanceDate` or any other relevant date constraints (e.g., `expirationDate`) are present, they MUST be
validated to ensure the credential is within its valid timeframe.

## Security Considerations

> The following security considerations are to be considered:

Author: also state which catastrophic failure might occur when you don't do this properly

> - The Root CA of the did:x509 needs to be checked against the root CA structure of the use case. For instance, in case

Author: ```suggestion
- The `ca-fingerprint` of the did:x509 needs to be checked against the trust anchor specified by the use case. For instance, in case
```

  of UZI certificates the ROOT CA must match the associated root CA chain.

### Certificate Revocation

The revocation status of the issuer's certificate is a critical component of `X509Credential` validation. Implementers
MUST use reliable revocation checking mechanisms (e.g., OCSP or CRL) and handle failures (e.g., network issues)
appropriately to avoid false-positive validations.

### Field Alignment

Restricting the `credentialSubject` fields to those present in the `did:x509` DID Document ensures alignment with the

> X.509 certificate, reducing the risk of unauthorized data inclusion.

Author: "otherwise, an attacker could ..."

key of the UZI register to verify the signature of the certificate. This way the holder of the certificate can prove
that the certificate is valid and that the information in the certificate is correct. The UZI certificates are issued
to:

* Individuals that work in healthcare, such as doctors, nurses, etc. They hold this certificate on a UZI card.
* Organisations that work in healthcare, such as hospitals, pharmacies, etc. They hold this certificate as server
  certificates.

#### UZI certificate structure for organisations

The UZI certificate is used to identify the holder of the certificate. The UZI certificate contains information about
the holder of the certificate. This information is used to identify the holder of the certificate. The UZI certificate
contains the following information (of intrest):

* The `subject.CN` The full FQN.
* The `subject.O` the name of the holder of the certificate.
* The `subject.serialNumber ` The URI number
* The `subject.C` The subject country
* The `subject.ST` The subject state
* The `subject.L` The subject locality (city)
* The `subject.commonName` the full FQN.

> * The `san.dNSName` the DNS name of the holder of the certificate.

Author: is this the casing? ugly...

* The `san.otherName` a string containing `<OID CA>-<versie-nr>-<UZI-nr>-<pastype>-<Abonnee-nr>-<rol>-<AGB-code>`,
  where:
  * `<OID CA>` is the OID of the CA that issued the certificate, `2.16.528.1.1007.99.2110` for CIBG.
  * `<versie-nr>` is the version number of the certificate.
  * `<UZI-nr>` is the UZI number of the holder of the certificate, same as `subject.serialNumber`.
  * `<pastype>` is the type of the holder of the certificate, always `S`.
  * `<Abonnee-nr>` is the subscriber URA of the holder of the certificate.
  * `<rol>` is the role of the holder of the certificate, always "0.00"
  * `<AGB-code>` is the AGB code of the holder of the certificate.

## Mapping UZI certificate to X509Credential

The mapping of certificates to x509 is depending

### The ROOT G3

> The `did:x509` specification dictates that the fingerprint of the Root CA is part of the did:x509. For mapping an UZI

Reviewer 4: No it doesn't:

> ca-fingerprint is chain[i].fingerprint[ca-fingerprint-alg] with i > 0, that is, either an intermediate or root CA certificate.

certificate to an X509Credential the ROOT CA MUST match one of the certificates in the UZI ROOT CA register hierarchy.
For G3 this is:

```asciidoc
        ┌────────────────────────────────────┐        
        │ Staat der Nederlanden Root CA - G3 │        
        └────────────────┬───────────────────┘        
                         │                            
┌────────────────────────▼───────────────────────────┐
│ Staat der Nederlanden Organisatie Services CA - G3 │
└────────────────────────┬───────────────────────────┘
                         │                            
    ┌────────────────────▼───────────────────────┐    
    │ UZI-register Medewerker niet op naam CA G3 │    
    └────────────────────────────────────────────┘    
```

### Field mapping of the UZI credential

> The following fields are commonly used for mapping UZI certificates to X509Credentials

Reviewer 4: We are specifying it here how it should be used, not how it is used. So rephrase to something like: The following fields MUST be included in the mapping.

* The `subject.O` the name of the holder of the certificate. Maps to `subject.O` in the X509Credential.
* The `subject.L` The subject locality (city)

> * The `san.otherName` a string containing `<OID CA>-<versie-nr>-<UZI-nr>-<pastype>-<Abonnee-nr>-<rol>-<AGB-code>`,

Reviewer 4: Feels like duplication to the above text. Better to refer to the correct section of the CPS.

  where:
  * `<OID CA>` is the OID of the CA that issued the certificate, `2.16.528.1.1007.99.2110` for CIBG.
  * `<versie-nr>` is the version number of the certificate.
  * `<UZI-nr>` is the UZI number of the holder of the certificate, same as `subject.serialNumber`.
  * `<pastype>` is the type of the holder of the certificate, always `S`.
  * `<Abonnee-nr>` is the subscriber URA of the holder of the certificate.
  * `<rol>` is the role of the holder of the certificate, always "0.00"
  * `<AGB-code>` is the AGB code of the holder of the certificate.

## The use of UZI server certificate in the Nuts network or identifying organizations

The focus on trust in the NUTS network for organizations lies primarily on the URA number identified as the
`<Abonnee-nr>` on the UZI certificate. This number is used to identify the holder of the certificate within the Dutch
healthcare ecosystem . The holder of the certificate can use the UZI certificate in combination with the private
key to proof the ownership of the URA number. The diagram below shows how the UZI certificate can be used to transfer

> the trust from the CIBG register into the NUTS ecosystem using the `did:x509` method and the `X509Credential` Verifiable

Reviewer 4: CIBG and UZI register are both mentioned here as issuer, I would stick with the latter.

Credential.

> ```asciidoc

Reviewer 4: Nice diagram. Perhaps make it generic and move it to the introduction section of this spec?

Reviewer 4: A few things which a vague for me:
- Source of Trust should be renamed to something else. I think the dutch term is "authentieke bron". I would advise to look into eidas 2 or de ARF
- Holder of Trust, I don't know what this means, is this a thing?
- Two views are mixed: the proces role (issuer, holder verifier) and compents (wallet, keys, credentials). Difficult to read.
- A dotted line looks like a flow, but why does the credential points to a VP?
- Perhaps add numbering to the steps if that is what you try to explain?

```

The main steps in the diagram are:

* The holder generates a keypair and requests a UZI certificate from the UZI register with a Certificate Signing
  Request (CSR).
* The UZI register issues the certificate to the holder of the UZI certificate and signs the request with the
  intermediate CA, linked to the root CA.
* The holder of the UZI creates a `X509Credential` Verifiable Credential:
  * The holder set the `did:x509` of the UZI certificate as issuer to the `X509Credential` Verifiable Credential.
  * The holder includes the complete chain in the `X509Credential` Verifiable Credential.
  * The holder issues the `X509Credential` Verifiable Credential to its own NUTS identity as `did:web` .
  * The holder signs the `X509Credential` Verifiable Credential with the keypair associated with the UZI certificate.
* The holder places the `X509Credential` Verifiable Credential in the wallet.
* The holder presents the `X509Credential` Verifiable Credential to the verifier, and signs the presentation with the
  keypair associated with the `did:web` of the holder.
* The verifier now can verify that:

>   * The `X509Credential` Verifiable Credential is issued by a `did:x509` issued by the the UZI register.

Reviewer 4: > a `did:x509` issued by the the UZI register.

This is a bit short through the corner ;)
The did is not issued be the UZI register (CIBG?). It is signed with a private key which is also associated with a certificate issued by the UZI register.

  * The `X509Credential` Verifiable Credential is signed by the holder of the UZI certificate.
  * The attributes of the `X509Credential` Verifiable Credential match the attributes of the UZI certificate.

>   * The URA number of the holder of the UZI certificate is present in the `X509Credential` Verifiable Credential.

Reviewer 4: Isn't this the other way around:
The verifier verifies that the URA number as claimed by the VC is present in the (trusted) certificate. Also implied by the bullet above.

### Using x509 for signing JWTs

The JWT is a standard that is used to sign and encrypt JSON objects. Thus standard allows for the signing and encryption
of JSON objects with certificates part of a certificate chain. This allows for the signing of JSON objects with the
private key of the certificate and the verification of the signature with the public key of the certificate, and the
verification of the certificate chain with the public key of the CA. This is done by using the following headers fields:

* `x5c`, the ordered certificate chain as a list of base64 encoded certificates in the DER format, with the signing certificate first and the root certificate last.
* `x5t#S256`, the thumbprint of the signing certificate as a SHA256 hash.

### The `did:x509` DID Method

> The `did:x509` DID method is a method that can be used to create a Decentralized Identifier (DID) based on an x509 certificate chain. Trust in the DID is anchored by specifying the (hash of) one of the chain's intermediate, or the root CA's certificate. The did:x509 method is used to specify specific attributes of the signing certificate to specify the holder of the signing certificate. By doing this, a did:x509 DID can be used to identify the holder of the signing certificate by specifying attributes that are assigned to the signing certificate. So, for example following did:x509:

Reviewer: wording, *specify specific*

  - Attackers gain the ability to impersonate legitimate entities in scenarios such as encrypted communication or
    identity verification.

### **8. Certificate Misuse**

- Without proper validation of certificate attributes (e.g., URA number in UZI certificates), certificates may be
  misused in unintended contexts.
- **Consequences**:
  - Fraud or impersonation using certificates outside their intended scope.
  - Misrepresentation of organizations or individuals.

### **9. Lack of Reliable Revocation Handling**

- If revocation checks poorly handle network issues or failures (e.g., OCSP response unavailability), it could result in
  the acceptance of revoked or invalid certificates.
- **Consequences**:
  - Increased risk of improper trust, allowing revoked credentials to function within the system.
  - Security-critical applications become susceptible to breaches.

## References

- [Verifiable Credentials Data Model v1.1](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/)
- [DID:X509 Method Specification](https://trustoverip.github.io/tswg-did-x509-method-specification/)
- [X.509 Certificate Revocation (OCSP/CRL)](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5280)

> # An application of the RFC023: UZI server certificates

Reviewer: Propose to move this to the wiki. Future changes will see UZI being removed in favour of PKIo.

Reviewer 3: Moved to https://wiki.nuts.nl/books/x509credential

certificate revocation checks, the `NutsX509Credential` ensures integrity and adherence to the PKI trust model.

## Definitions

- **NutsX509Credential**: A Verifiable Credential whose issuer is a `did:x509` DID and whose structure adheres to the
  requirements in this document.
- **did:x509**: A Decentralized Identifier (DID) method specified by the Trust Over IP Foundation, where the DID is
  derived from an X.509 certificate.
- **Issuer Certificate**: The X.509 certificate associated with the `did:x509` DID that issued the credential.
- **Credential Subject**: The entity described by the credential.
- **Revocation Check**: The process of verifying the revocation status of the issuer certificate using mechanisms like
  OCSP or CRL.

## Used standards and technologies

This RFC builds on the following standards and technologies:

* [X.509 Certificate Standard](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc5280)
* [JSON Web Signature (JWS)](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7515#section-4.1.6)
* [did:x509 method specification](https://trustoverip.github.io/tswg-did-x509-method-specification/), with modifications

> * [Verifiable Credentials Data Model v1.1](https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model/)

Reviewer 3: Is this version correct?

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't it be: https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-model-2.0/

Reviewer 2: we use 1.1, 2.0 is still in draft

`did:web`.
The first snippet is the JWT header, and the second snippet is the credential payload.

(TODO: check this example)

```json
{
  "alg": "PS256",
  "typ": "JWT",
  "x5c": [
    "<base64 encoded leaf-certificate in the DER format>",
    "<base64 encoded issuer-intermediate-certificate in the DER format>",
    "<base64 encoded issuer-certificate in the DER format>"
  ],
  "x5t": "<thumbprint>",
  "kid": "did:x509:0:sha256:WE4P5dd8DnLHSkyHaIjhp4udlkF9LqoKwCvu9gl38jk::subject:O:OLVG%20Oost::subject:L:Amsterdam::san:otherName:23419943234#1"
}
```

(TODO: Add right JSON-LD context)
Payload:

```json
{
  "vc": {
    "@context": [
      "https://www.w3.org/2018/credentials/v1"
    ],
    "type": [
      "VerifiableCredential",
      "NutsX509Credential"
    ],
    "issuer": "did:x509:0:sha256:WE4P5dd8DnLHSkyHaIjhp4udlkF9LqoKwCvu9gl38jk::subject:O:OLVG%20Oost::subject:L:Amsterdam::san:otherName:23419943234",
    "issuanceDate": "2024-12-01T00:00:00Z",
    "credentialSubject": {
      "id": "did:web:example.com",
      "subject:O": "OLVG Oost",
      "subject:L": "Amsterdam",
      "san:otherName": "23419943234"
    }
  }
}
```

## Validation

### 1. Verify Credential Structure

> To validate an `NutsX509Credential`, the following steps MUST be performed:

Author: It's just `X509Credential` (without the Nuts prefix)

Reviewer 3: I'm confused now, nuts node:
```
	X509CredentialType = "X509Credential"
```
go-didx509-toolkit:
```
var CredentialType = ssi.MustParseURI("X509Credential")
```

Reviewer 3: Renaming it.

* A Free-to-Use CA For Code Signing (fulcio-issuer)
  * Any issuer hostname

### 3.6 Extending the `did:x509` specification

> This RFC extends the Subject Other Name (san) policy with the following attribute of the DID policy `san`:

Reviewer: This addition is not needed:
```suggestion
This RFC extends the Subject Other Name (san) policy with the following attribute:
```

- The credential MUST be in JWT format.
- `type`: MUST include `VerifiableCredential` and `X509Credential`.
- `issuer`: MUST be a valid `did:x509` identifier.
- `credentialSubject`: MUST only contain fields explicitly present in the `did:x509` DID policies with the fields mapped by each type as a separate map. An example: 
```
{
  "subject": {
    "O" : "My Organisation"
  },
  "san" : {

>     "email" : "info@example.com,"

Author: ```suggestion
    "email" : "info@example.com"
```

Failure to validate the issuer certificate invalidates the credential.

### 5.3 Validate the Credential Subject

The `credentialSubject` MUST be verified against the `did:x509` DID Document. Specifically:

> - Every field in the `credentialSubject` MUST be present in the `did:x509` DID Document. The fields in the `credentialSubject` are nested with their DID policies as keys, so `subject:L:Amsterdam`, becomes: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Every field in the `credentialSubject` MUST be present in the `did:x509` policies. The fields in the `credentialSubject` are nested with their DID policies as keys, so `subject:L:Amsterdam`, becomes: 
```

```json
{
  "sub" :  "did:x509:subject:O:Amsterdam",
  ...
  "credentialSubject" : {
    "id" : "did:x509:subject:O:Amsterdam",
    "subject": {

>       "O" : "Amsterdam"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      "L" : "Amsterdam"
```
